The Project Gutenberg eBook of I, Mars
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: I, Mars

Author: Ray Bradbury

Illustrator: Hannes Bok
        Lawrence Sterne Stevens

Release date: September 10, 2025 [eBook #76857]

Language: English

Original publication: Niagra Falls, NY: Fictioneers, Inc, 1949

Credits: Roger Frank


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK I, MARS ***



                               I, MARS

                           By Ray Bradbury
                           

	Alone on Mars, yet not alone ... For old Barton’s younger
	selves lived on, hating, tormenting him for his living proof
	that their hopes were dead!


The phone rang.

A grey hand lifted the receiver.

“Hello?”

“Hello, Barton?”

“Yes.”

“This is Barton!”

“What?”

“This is Barton!”

“It can’t be. This phone hasn’t rung in twenty years.”

The old man hung up.

Brrrrinnnng!

His grey hand seized the phone.

“Hello, Barton,” laughed the voice. “You have forgotten, haven’t you?”

The old man felt his heart grow small and like a cool stone. He felt
the wind blowing in off the dry Martian seas and the blue hills of
Mars. After twenty years of silence and cobwebs and now, tonight, on
his eightieth birthday, with a ghastly scream, this phone had wailed to
life.

“Who did you think it was?” said the voice. “A rocket captain? Did you
think someone had come to rescue you?”

“No.”

“What’s the date?”

Numbly, “July 20th, 2097.”

“Good Lord. Sixty years! Have you been sitting there that long? Waiting
for a rocket to come from Earth to rescue you?”

The old man nodded.

“Now, old man, do you know who I am? Think!”

“Yes.” The dry pale lips trembling. “I understand. I remember. We are
one. I am Emil Barton and you are Emil Barton.”

“With one difference. You are eighty. I am only twenty. All of life
before me!”

The old man began to laugh and then to cry. He sat holding the phone
like a lost and silly child in his fingers. The conversation was
impossible, and should not be continued, and yet he went on with it.
When he got hold of himself he held the phone close to his withered
lips and said, in deepest anguish, “Listen! You there! Listen, oh God,
if I could warn you! How can I? You’re only a voice. If I could show
you how lonely the years are. End it, kill yourself! Don’t wait! If you
knew what it is to change from the thing you are to the thing that is
me, today, here, now, at this end.”

“Impossible.” The voice of the young Barton laughed, far away. “I’ve no
way to tell if you ever get this call. This is all mechanical. You’re
talking to a transcription, no more. This is 2037. Sixty years in your
past. Today, the atom war started on Earth. All colonials were called
home from Mars, by rocket. I got left behind!”

“I remember,” whispered the old man.

“Alone on Mars,” laughed the young voice. “A month, a year, who cares?
There are foods and books. In my spare time I’ve made transcription
libraries of ten thousand words, responses, my voice, connected to
phone relays. In later months I’ll call, have someone to talk with.”

“Yes,” murmured the old man, remembering.

“Forty-sixty years from now my own transcripto-tapes will ring me up. I
don’t really think I’ll be here on Mars that long, it’s just a
beautifully ironic idea of mine, something to pass the time. Is that
really you, Barton? Is that really me?”

Tears fell from the old man’s eyes. “Yes!”

“I’ve made a thousand Bartons, tapes, sensitive to all questions, my
voice, in one thousand Martian towns. An army of Bartons over Mars,
while I wait for the rockets to return.”

“You fool,” the old man shook his head, wearily. “You waited sixty
years. You grew old waiting, always alone. And now you’ve become me and
you’re still alone in the empty cities.”

“Don’t expect my sympathy. You’re like a stranger, off in another
country. I can’t be sad. I’m alive when I make these tapes. And you’re
alive when you hear them. Both of us, to the other, incomprehensible.
Neither can warn the other, even though both respond, one to the other,
one automatically, the other warmly and humanly. I’m human now. You’re
human later. It’s insane. I can’t cry, because not knowing the future I
can only be optimistic. These hidden tapes can only react to a certain
number of stimuli from you. Can you ask a dead man to weep?”

“Stop it!” cried the old man, for his heart was sickening in him. He
felt the familiar great seizures of pain. Nausea moved through him, and
blackness. “Stop it! Oh God, but you were heartless. Go away!”

“Were, old man? I am. As long as the tapes glide on, as long as secret
spindles and hidden electronic eyes read and select and convert words
to send to you, I’ll be young, cruel, blunt. I’ll go on being young and
cruel long after you’re dead. Goodby.”

“Wait!” cried the old man.

Click.

                *       *       *       *       *

Barton sat holding the silent phone a long while. His heart gave him
intense pain.

What insanity it had been. In youth’s flush, how silly, how inspired,
those first secluded years, fixing the telephonic brains, the tapes,
the circuits, scheduling calls on time relays:

Brrrrinnnng!

“Morning, Barton. This is Barton. Seven o’clock. Rise and shine!”

Brrrrinnnng!

“Barton? Barton calling. You’re to go to Mars Town at noon. Install a
telephonic brain. Thought I’d remind you.”

“Thanks.”

Brrrrinnnng!

“Barton? Barton. Have lunch with me? The Rocket Inn?”

“Right.”

“See you. So long!”

Brrrrinnnng!

“That you, B.? Thought I’d cheer you. Firm chin, and all that. The
rescue rocket might come tomorrow, to save you.”

“Yes, tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow.”

Click.

But forty years had burned into smoke. Barton had muted the insidious
phones and their clever, clever repartee. He had sealed them into
silences. They were to call him only after he was eighty, if he still
lived. And now today, the phones ringing, and the past breathing in his
ear, sighing, whispering, murmuring, and remembering.

Brrrrinnnng!

He let it ring.

“I don’t have to answer it,” he thought.

Brrrrinnnng!

“There’s no one there at all,” he thought.

Brrrrinnnng!

“It’s like talking to yourself,” he thought. “But different. Oh God,
how different.”

He felt his hands crawl unconsciously toward the phone.

Click.

“Hello, old Barton, this is young Barton. One year older, though. I’m
twenty-one today. In the last year I’ve put voice brains in two hundred
towns on Mars, I’ve populated it with arrogant Bartons!”

“Yes.” The old man remembered those days six decades ago, those nights
of rushing over blue hills and into iron valleys of Mars, with a
truckful of machinery, whistling, happy. Another telephone, another
relay. Something to do. Something clever and wonderful and sad. Hidden
voices. Hidden, hidden. In those young days when death was not death,
time was not time, old age a faint echo from the long blue cavern of
years ahead. That young idiot, that sadistic fool, never thinking to
reap the harvest so sown.

“Last night,” said Barton, aged twenty-one, “I sat alone in a movie
theater in an empty town. I played an old Laurel and Hardy. Laughed so
much. God, how I laughed.”

“Yes.”

“I got an idea today. I recorded my voice one thousand times on one
tape. Broadcast from the town, it sounds like a thousand people living
there. A comforting noise, the noise of a crowd. I fixed it so doors
slam in town, children sing, music boxes play, all by clockworks. If I
don’t look out the window, if I just listen, it’s all right. But if I
look, it spoils the illusion. There’s only one solution. I’ll populate
the town with robots. I guess I’m getting lonely.”

The old man said, “Yes. That was your first sign.”

“What?”

“The first time you admitted you were lonely.”

“I’ve experimented with smells. As I walk down the deserted streets,
the smells of bacon and eggs, ham steak, fillets, soups, come from the
houses. All done with hidden machines. Clever?”

“Fantasy. Madness.”

“Self-protection, old man.”

“I’m tired.” Abruptly, the old man hung up. It was too much. The past
pouring over him, drowning him....

Swaying, he moved down the tower stairs to the streets of the town.

The town was dark. No longer did red neons burn, music play, or cooking
smells linger. Long ago he had abandoned the grim fantasy of the
mechanical lie. Listen! Are those footsteps? Smell! Isn’t that
strawberry pie! No, he had stopped it all. What had he done with the
robots? His mind puzzled. Oh, yes....

He moved to the dark canal where the stars shone in the quivering
waters.

Underwater, in row after fish-like row, rusting, were the robot
populations of Mars he had constructed over the years, and, in a wild
realization of his own insane inadequacy, had commanded to march, one
two three four! into the canal deeps, plunging, bubbling like sunken
bottles. He had killed them and shown no remorse.

                *       *       *       *       *

Brrrrinnnng.

Faintly a phone rang in a lightless cottage.

He walked on. The phone ceased.

Brrrrinnnng. Another cottage ahead, as if it knew of his passing. He
began to run. The ringing stayed behind. Only to be taken up by a
ringing from now this house--Brrrrinnnng! now that, now here, there! He
turned the corner. A phone! He darted on. Another corner. Another
phone!

“All right, all right!” he shrieked, exhausted. “I’m coming!”

“Hello, Barton.”

“What do you want!”

“I’m lonely. I only live when I speak. So I must speak. You can’t shut
me up forever.”

“Leave me alone!” said the old man, in horror. “Oh, my heart!”

“This is Barton, age twenty-four. Another couple of years gone.
Waiting. A little lonelier. I’ve read War and Peace, drunk sherry, run
restaurants with myself as waiter, cook, entertainer. And tonight, I
star in a film at the Tivoli--Emil Barton in _Love’s Labor Lost_,
playing all the parts, some with wigs, myself!”

“Stop calling me,” the old man’s eyes were fiery and insane. “Or I’ll
kill you!”

“You can’t kill me. You’ll have to find me, first!”

“I’ll find you!” A choking.

“You’ve forgotten where you hid me. I’m everywhere in Mars, in boxes,
in houses, in cables, towers, underground! Go ahead, try! What’ll you
call it? Telecide? Suicide? Jealous, are you? Jealous of me here, only
twenty-four, bright-eyed, strong, young, young, young? All right, old
man, it’s war! Between us. Between me! A whole regiment of us, all ages
from twenty to sixty, against you, the real one. Go ahead, declare
war!”

“I’ll kill you!” screamed Barton.

Click. Silence.

“Kill you!” He threw the phone out the window, shrieking.

In the midnight cold, the ancient automobile moved in deep valleys.
Under Barton’s feet on the floorboard were revolvers, rifles, dynamite.
The roar of the car was in his thin, tired bones.

I’ll find them, he thought. Find and destroy, all of them. Oh, God,
God, how can he do this to me?

He stopped the car. A strange town lay under the late twin moons. There
was no wind.

He held the rifle in his cold hands. He peered at the poles, the
towers, the boxes. Where? Where was this town’s voice hidden? That
tower? Or that one there! Where! So many years ago. So long gone. So
forgotten. He turned his head now this way, now that, wildly. It must
be that tower! Was he certain? Or this box here, or the transformer
half up that tower?

He raised the rifle.

The tower fell with the first bullet.

All of them, he thought. All of the towers in this town will have to be
cut apart. I’ve forgotten. Too long.

The car moved along the silent street.

Brrrrinnnng!

He looked at the deserted drugstore.

Brrrrinnnng!

Pistol in hand, he shot the lock off the door, and entered.

Click.

“Hello, Barton? Just a warning. Don’t try to rip down all the towers,
blow things up. Cut your own throat that way. Think it over....”

Click.

He stepped out of the phone booth slowly and moved into the street and
listened to the telephone towers humming high in the air, still alive,
still untouched. He looked at them and then he understood.

He could not destroy the towers. Suppose a rocket came from Earth,
impossible idea, but suppose it came tonight, tomorrow, next week? and
landed on the other side of the planet, and used the phones to try to
call Barton, only to find the circuits dead? Yes, imagine!

Barton dropped his gun.

“A rocket won’t come,” he argued, softly, logically with himself. “I’m
old. It won’t come now. It’s too late.”

But suppose it came, and you never knew, he thought. No, you’ve got to
keep the lines open.

Brrrrinnnng.

                *       *       *       *       *

He turned dully. His eyes were blinking and not seeing. He shuffled
back into the drugstore and fumbled with the receiver.

“Hello?” A strange voice.

“Please,” pleaded the old man, brokenly. “Don’t bother me.”

“Who’s this, who’s there? Who is it? Where are you?” cried the voice,
surprised.

“Wait a minute.” The old man staggered. “This is Emil Barton, who’s
that?”

“This is Captain Leonard Rockwell, Earth Rocket 48. Just arrived from
New York.”

“No, no, no.”

“Are you there, Mr. Barton?”

“No, no, it can’t be, it just can’t.”

“Where are you?”

“You’re lying, it’s false!” The old man had to lean against the booth
wall. His blue eyes were cold blind. “It’s you, Barton, making, making
fun of me, lying to me again!”

“This is Captain Rockwell, Rocket 48. Just landed in New Schenecty.
Where are you?”

“In Green Town,” he gasped. “That’s a thousand miles from you.”

“Look, Barton, can you come here?”

“What?”

“We’ve repairs on our rocket. Exhausted from the flight. Can you come
help?”

“Yes, yes.”

“We’re at the tarmac outside town. Can you rush by tomorrow?”

“Yes, but--”

“Well?”

The old man petted the phone, pitifully. “How’s Earth? How’s New York?
Is the war over? Who’s President now? What happened?”

“Plenty of time for gossip when you arrive.”

“Is everything fine?”

“Fine.”

“Thank God.” The old man listened to the far voice. “Are you sure
you’re Captain Rockwell?”

“Damn it, man!”

“I’m sorry!”

He hung up and ran.

They were here, after many years, unbelievable, his own, who would take
him back to Earth seas and skies and mountains.

He started the car. He would drive all night. Could he do it? What of
his heart--It would be worth a risk, to see people, to shake hands, to
hear them near you.

The car thundered in the hills.

That voice. Captain Rockwell. It couldn’t be himself, forty years ago.
He had never made a recording like that. Or had he? In one of his
depressive fits, in a spell of drunken cynicism, hadn’t he once made a
false tape of a false landing on Mars with a synthetic captain, an
imaginary crew? He jerked his grey head, savagely. No. He was a
suspicious fool. Now was no time to doubt. He must run under the moons
of Mars, hour on hour. What a party they would have!

The sun rose. He was immensely tired, full of thorns and brambles of
weakness, his heart plunging and aching, his fingers fumbling the
wheel, but the thing that pleased him most was the thought of one last
phone call: Hello, young Barton, this is old Barton. I’m leaving for
Earth today! Rescued! He chuckled weakly.

He drove into the shadowy limits of New Schenectady at sundown.
Stepping from his car he stood staring at the rocket tarmac, rubbing
his reddened eyes.

The rocket field was empty. No one ran to meet him. No one shook his
hand, shouted, or laughed.

He felt his heart roar into pain. He knew blackness and a sensation of
falling through the open sky. He stumbled toward an office.

Inside, six phones sat in a neat row.

He waited, gasping.

Finally:

Brrrrinnnng.

He lifted the heavy receiver.

A voice said, “I was wondering if you’d get there alive.”

The old man did not speak but stood with the phone in his hands.

The voice continued, “An elaborate joke. Captain Rockwell reporting for
duty, sir. Your orders, sir?”

“You,” groaned the old man.

“How’s your heart, old man?”

“No!”

“Hoped the trip would kill you. Had to eliminate you some way, so I
could live, if you call a transcription living.”

“I’m going out now,” replied the old man, “and blow it all up. I don’t
care. I’ll blow up everything until you’re all dead!”

“You haven’t the strength. Why do you think I had you travel so far, so
fast? This is your last trip!”

The old man felt his heart falter. He would never make the other towns.
The war was lost. He slid into a chair and made low sobbing, mournful
noises from his loose mouth. He glared at the five other, silent
phones. As if at a signal, they burst into silver chorus! A nest of
ugly birds screaming!

Automatic receivers popped up.

The office whirled. “Barton, Barton, Barton!!”

He throttled the phone in his hands, the voice, the youth, the time of
long ago. He mashed, choked it and still it laughed at him. He
throttled it. He beat it. He kicked at it. He hated it with hands and
mouth and blind, raging eye. He furled the hot wire like serpentine in
his fingers, ripped it into red bits which fell about his stumbling
feet.

He destroyed three other phones. There was a sudden silence.

And as if his body now discovered a thing which it had long kept
secret, it seemed to decay upon his tired bones. The flesh of his
eyelids fell away like flower petals. His mouth became a withered rose.
The lobes of his ears melting wax. He pushed his chest with his hands
and fell face down. He lay still. His breathing stopped. His heart
stopped.

After a long spell, the remaining two phones rang.

Twice. Three times.

A relay snapped somewhere. The two phone voices were connected, one to
the other.

“Hello, Barton?”

“Yes, Barton?”

“Aged twenty-four.”

“I’m twenty-six. We’re both young.

What’s happened?”

“I don’t know. Listen.”

The silent room. The old man did not stir on the floor. The wind blew in
the broken window. The air was cool.

“Congratulate me, Barton, this is my twenty-sixth birthday!”

“Congratulations!”

Laughter drifted out the window into the dead city.


[Transcriber’s note: This story appeared in the April, 1949 issue of
_Super Science Stories_ magazine.]




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK I, MARS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

